<div class="topheader">

LEARN YOURSELF A GTD  
OR:  
“GTD IN 15 MINUTES”

</div>

# What is “GTD”?

GTD – or “Getting things done” – is a framework for organising and tracking your
tasks and projects.  Its aim is a bit higher than just “getting things done”,
though.  (It should have been called “Getting things done in a much better way
than just letting things happen, which often turns out not to be very cool at
all”.)  Its aim is to make you have 100% trust in a system for collecting tasks,
ideas, and projects – both vague things like <span class="action">“invent
greatest thing ever”</span> and concrete things like <span class="action">“call
Ada 25 August to discuss cheesecake recipe”</span>.  *Everything*!

Sound like all other run-of-the-mill to-do list systems, you say? Well in many
ways it is, but there is more to it, and it's really simple.  Promise! So please
read on.

One of the basic assumptions of GTD is that you are dumb – or rather, that your
subconsciousness is quite dumb when it comes to thinking about things you
*should* have done.  Like knowing you need to buy more flour and sugar, but
forgetting to remind you when you actually are in the store.

A great part of the “magic” is to convert both tasks and whims into *physical*
and *visible* **actions**.

What GTD gives you – when understood and implemented properly – is a foolproof
system for keeping track of what you need to do, should do, or should *consider*
to do. When your system and your trust in your system is in place your your
subconsciousness will stop keeping track of all the things you need to do and
constantly reminding you.  This reduces stress, frees up precious brain time to
more productive thinking – maybe even save *real* time so that you have more
time for ballet lessons, painting class, roller-blading, or whatever you kids do
these days.

![lists!](images/lists.png)

Awesome! So how does it actually work? It works by using special yoga techniques
and daily mental exercises.  No, haha! Just kidding.  It works by simply
maintaining lists, which every kid with paper and a pencil can do.  Even
computers can maintain lists these days!

You will have to make the following lists:

1. <span class="listname">In</span>
1. <span class="listname">Next actions</span> (probably several)
1. <span class="listname">Waiting for</span>
1. <span class="listname">Projects</span>
1. <span class="listname">Some day/maybe</span>

These lists will be reviewed regularly and form the backbone of the GTD system.
Their workings are described below.  In addition to the lists you will need a
<span class="calendar">calendar</span> which lets you write down both date and
time bound tasks/events.

<div class="important">

This run-through of the GTD method is meant to be brief. It's written from one
person's perspective and other people would probably assess the importance of
different aspects of GTD differently.

If you want a complete overview of GTD you would be wise to read
David Allen's book which formalised the method he developed:
**“Getting Things Done: The Art of Stress-Free Productivity”**
([Amazon](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0142000280?ie=UTF8&tag=erlehamb-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0142000280)![image](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=erlehamb-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0142000280),
[Kindle Store](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000WH7PKY?ie=UTF8&tag=erlehamb-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B000WH7PKY)![image](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=erlehamb-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B000WH7PKY),
[Bookdepository](http://www.bookdepository.co.uk/book/9780142000281/Getting-Things-Done?a_aid=ehamberg),
[Google Books](http://books.google.com/books?id=LAx_PwAACAAJ&dq=getting+things+done),
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Getting_Things_Done)).

</div>

# The “<span class="listname">in</span>“ list

The <span class="listname">in</span> list is where you capture ideas and tasks
as they occur to you.  Either by your boss telling you to bake her a carrot
cake, or by you seeing a poster for a circus you want to see.  The barrier for
adding something to your <span class="listname">in</span> list should be as low
as possible – jot it down in a notebook or press the right buttons on your
pocket telephone.  While I have called it *the* <span class="listname">in</span>
list, It is no problem to have more than one.  Maybe a computer program for when
you are in front of a computer and a notebook for when you loiter outside the
mall?  The important thing is that you are able to write down things as they
occur to you.  We want to offload work from the brain, remember?

When you first start to use GTD you should take an hour to write down all things
you want to – or have to – do.  These *open loops* as Allen calls them include
*all* things that aren't as they should be or where they should be.  Do you need
to replace your toothbrush? Return the tea cup you borrowed from your aunt
Trillian? Should you repaint your bed in another colour?  All these things
should go on your <span class="listname">in</span> list.

# Processing the “<span class="listname">in</span>” list

<div class="remember">

If you have just started to use GTD and collected tonnes of items in your <span
class="listname">in</span> list during the initial “brain-emptying”, this
process can take a while.  However, after this the <span
class="listname">in</span> list will be processed continuously.

</div>

The items on your <span class="listname">in</span> list should be processed one
by one in the order they appear on your list.  When processing at an item in
your <span class="listname">in</span> list the first question you need to ask is
**is it actionable?** – in other words, do you need to *do* something?  If the
answer is NO, you either throw it away if you no longer need it, keep it as
reference material (“I will probably need this article again some day...“), add
it to a ”some day/maybe list” (for things like <span class="action">“learn
Indonesian”</span>), or **incubate** it.  Wait, what! Sit on it?  Yes, sort of.
If it's something that you want to remind yourself of later (“I really didn't
understand this article, I should have a look at it again in two weeks”) it
should go into your calendar or your tickler file.  Don't know what a tickler
file is?  Worry not, it is introduced below and its weird name explained.

Now, if the item you're currently processing *is* actionable – in other words:
something should be done about it – you should ask the question “*what is the
next action?*”  **The next action needs to be a *physical* and *visible*
action**.  In other words, not <span class="action">“plan cake lottery”</span>,
but <span class="action">“e-mail Arthur and Camille and remind them to bake
their cakes”</span>.

<div class="important">

This very thing – that next actions should be the next **physical, visible**
action to move the project closer to its goal – is perhaps *the* most important
“rule” in GTD.  By using a few extra seconds to come up with what *physically*
needs to be done, you make sure that your “next action” lists will only contain
the things you can choose to do at any moment.  The “pre-processing” has already
been done (the actions themselves may very well be planning tasks, though) and
this greatly lowers the resistance to *do* the things.

</div>

When you have determined the next action you should consider if it takes two
minutes or less to do it.  If it does, do it right away.  (Things like and <span
class="action">“e-mail funny cat video to grandma”</span>.)  The reason for this
is simple: if the action takes two minutes or less, the overhead of tracking it
will be very large compared to how long it takes to just *do* it.  If it takes
more than two minutes you should **delegate** it if appropriate – noting what
was delegated and when on a <span class="listname">waiting for</span> list, or
add it to your own <span class="listname">next actions</span> list.  Unless your
secret superpower is delegation, this is probably where most things will end up.

To summarise, when processing your <span class="listname">in</span> list(s), you
should follow this procedure:

<div class="important">

-   If the item is NOT “actionable”:

    Throw it away, archive it for future reference, or put it on your
    “some day/maybe” list.

-   If item IS “actionable”:
    -   Work out the next physical, visible action.
    -   If this action will it take 2 minutes or less: Do it!

    -   If this action will it take more than 2 minutes:
        -   Delegate it and add it to your <span class="listname">waiting for</span> list.

            OR

        -   Add it to your <span class="listname">next actions</span> list of things to be done.

</div>

# The “<span class="listname">next actions</span>” list

So what's the <span class="listname">next actions</span> list?  Well, uh, a list
of your next actions, obviously.  Another name for these actions is
“as-soon-as-possible actions” – it is simply those things from which you will
pick out what to work on when you are not watching funny cat videos on Youtube
or playing Farmville.

# The “<span class="listname">waiting for</span>” list

When you delegate work to others, send an e-mail you expect or need to be
replied to, order something, or have a task that is “blocked” because you are
waiting for someone else to do something, it should be written down on your
<span class="listname">waiting for</span> list.  These items should always be
stamped with the current date so that you'll be able to e-mail your co-worker
Marvin and say “I'm still waiting for the WTF report you said you'd finish
within a month.  That was 32 days ago!”.

# Projects

If your still with me you might have worried that a <span
class="action">“research artificial intelligence textbooks”</span> action on
your <span class="listname">next actions</span> list is all that is written down
about your plan to take over the world.  Wouldn't it be easy to lose track once
that action is done and erased from your list? Yes, it kinda would...  That's
where the <span class="listname">projects</span> list comes in.

GTD's definition of a project is very broad.  It defines any objective that
requires more than one action as a project.  These projects should go on your
<span class="listname">projects</span> list.  This list is simply a list of
project titles and – if you like – descriptions and intended outcomes of the
projects.

# Contexts

![computer!](images/computer.png)

Contexts are “tags” you put on the items on your <span class="listname">next
actions</span> lists saying where the action can be done, or what equipment you
need to perform it.  An action can be “tagged” with a context in several ways;
the easiest is probably to simply have different <span class="listname">next
actions</span> lists – one for each context. If you use a new-fangled electronic
list manager you can often have “smart” lists for each tags – giving the same
result. (With so-called smartphones it's probably even possible to use its
location awareness to only present actions whose context match your current
location. If so: that is amazing! We live in the future!)

It is common to prefix contexts with an ‛@’ which makes sense when the context
is a location, but should just be thought of as a notation in other cases.
Examples of contexts are <span class="context">@ home</span>, <span
class="context">@ computer</span>, and <span class="context">@ office</span>.

### Examples of actions and their contexts

<div class="example">
<table>
<tr>
<th>Action</th>
<th>Context</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span class="action">Buy more rainbow-coloured dog food</span></td>
<td><span class="context">@ city</span> or <span class="context">@ store</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span class="action">Browse cuteoverload.com</span></td>
<td><span class="context">@ computer</span> or <span class="context">@
the world wide webs</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span class="action">Smile to a stranger</span></td>
<td><span class="context">@ everywhere</span></td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>

How many contexts you need depend on how many next actions you will have and how
your work day looks like.  The important thing is to be able to assess – at a
glance – what your possible actions are depending on where you physically are
and what equipment you have available.  It can also be a good idea to make an
“everywhere” context for things you can do no matter where you are (“FOO”).

## Agenda contexts

If you have regular meetings with people, it can be beneficial to have “agenda
contexts” – one for each person – where you write down the things you want to
talk about during the next meeting as they occur. For example, if you have a
weekly meeting with Foobert, you might consider having a “<span
class="context">@ Foobert Agenda</span>” context.  These contexts will of course
change along with changing teams/managers/supervisor, etc.

# The “<span class="listname">some day/maybe</span>” list

You don't want to lose your million-dollar idea of making a “jumping to
conclusions” mat that lets people jump to conclusions, but since this is a
project you want to realise when you have more time you don't want to have it
“pollute” your <span class="listname">next actions</span> lists or your list of
<span class="listname">projects</span> either. (Remember that the <span
class="listname">next actions</span> only contains the things that should be
done as soon as possible and that your <span class="listname">projects</span>
list will be reviewed regularly to make sure that all projects have at least one
next action.)

This is where the <span class="listname">some day/maybe</span> list comes it.
This list simply contains ideas and projects you *might* want to realise at some
time in the future. This is where both <span class="action">“replace ugly
painting in bed room”</span> and <span class="action">“start a cult”</span>
should go.  (Assuming – of course – that you don't want to do either of those
things right now.)

# Calendar

![calendar!](images/calendar.png)

The <span class="calendar">calendar</span> is for things you *have* to do on a
certain date or at a certain time, and *nothing else*!  That's right; no putting
<span class="action">“install Bonzibudddy“</span> on your calendar for next
Wednesday if you just *now* think you *want* to have it done then.

Why?  By only having items which really are time and date sensitive on your
<span class="calendar">calendar</span> it will be more useful since it will
actually tell you the things you *have* to do a certain day without being
“diluted“ with other items.  The thing you *want* to do will be on your <span
class="listname">next actions</span> list any way, so you will be reminded about
it and have the chance to do it anyway if you have the time.

# Weekly review

Allen calls the weekly review a “critical factor for success” and he is not
joking.  If you start using the GTD framework and you are not a robot, things
will start to slip. You will complete the next action of a project and forget to
add a new, next action for that project. You will forget to remove next actions
that you – if you really thought about it – know that you won't do in the near
future because more important things have shown up.

*The weekly review* should be done – you guessed it – once per week. It will
take a while, so you should ideally set off some time in advance, for example
Friday or Sunday afternoon. When doing the weekly review you should at least do
the following:

* Make sure each project has at least one next action.
* Make sure that each action on your <span class="listname">next actions</span>
  list is *actually* something you want to do if you have the time. If not, move
  it (and/or the project it belongs to) to your <span
  class="listname">someday/maybe</span> list.
* Look through your someday/maybe list and see if some projects/actions should
  be moved to the list of current projects/the <span class="listname">next
  actions</span> list. If creating a new project on your <span
  class="listname">projects</span> list, make sure to find its next physical,
  visible action and put it on the <span class="listname">next actions</span>
  list.

## Trigger lists

When doing the weekly review it can be a good idea to work through a “trigger
list”.  A trigger list is simply a list of key words to “trigger” you to
remember any open loops you still haven't captured in your system. A trigger
list could look like the following:

* Boss
* Co-workers
* Projects started, not completed
* Projects that need to be started
* People I need to get back to
* …

When working through your trigger list, put anything that you remember in your
<span class="listname">in</span> list to be processed afterwards.

An example of a trigger list can be seen at [*Lifehacker*'s trigger list for
students](http://lifehacker.com/5611657/use-a-weekly-review-list-to-stay-a-step-ahead-this-semester).
You probably want to customise your own list as you get more experience and
learn what works best for *you*.

# Getting it to work

To actually get your GTD system to work there are some important “rules” to
follow.  ...

It is important that you have **hard edges** between your lists, and between
your <span class="listname">next actions</span> lists.

# Tools

The read/review folder and tickler file are two tools which – while they aren't
directly part of the GTD method – may be beneficial to use together with GTD.

## Read/review folder

You will probably have quite a few <span class="action">“read [some
document]”</span> actions on their <span class="listname">next actions</span>
list.  A read/review folder is simply a physical folder you carry around,
containing the papers, documents, and anything else you want to read.  The idea
is to have this material available whenever you have a few minutes to kill. In
the dentist's waiting room?  Waiting for your food at a café?  Both perfect
opportunities to peruse the paper on *Periophthalmus modestus* phylogeny or
pretend to read the memo from your boss!

It is really important to have “sharp edges” here, too. Only the things you
actually want to read when you have the time should be put in this folder so
that you actually *will* pick it up during those little windows of free time
that show up during the day.

## Tickler file

![tickle!](images/tickle.png)

This strangely-named concept is simply a collection of 43 file folders. Why 43?
Because that means that you can have one for each of the **31** days of a month
plus one for each of the **12** months of the year.  If you're reaching for your
calculator now – just trust me on the number 43.

So what are these folders used for? The idea is that you can place physical
items you will need on a specific day (tickets for the concert), reminders of
things you should do on a specific date (remember, the calendar is only for
things that *have* to be done on a specific date/time), or the notes from the
lecture you didn't really understand (“I will want to review these in a week
when my subconsciousness has chewed on it for a while”).

Every day when you get up, you open the folder with the current date. You then
pocket your concert tickets, decides that you *do* want to take the dog to the
dog hairdresser today, but push the lecture notes back three days since you
don't have time right now. Having emptied the folder, you place it in the back,
bringing tomorrow's folder to the front. At the end of each month, you open the
folder for the new month and deal with its contents – like putting items in the
correct day folders.

The tickler file thus provides a way to send yourself reminders in the future –
“tickling” your memory. Aaaaah!

# About this guide

This guide was written to serve as a simple, pragmatic guide to the “getting
things done” method.

The guide's visual style was inspired by Miran Lipovača's excellent guide to the
Haskell programming language “[Learn You a Haskell for Great
Good!](http://learnyouahaskell.com)”.

<!--
TODO
* more illustrations
* change title
* http://wikisummaries.org/Getting_Things_Done:_The_Art_of_Stress-Free_Productivity
-->
